The Shadowfell is one of the newer planes in DnD. It was created in 4e from a combination of the (demi)plane of Shadow, Ravenloft, the dark echo of the material plane, and parts of the lore from the negative energy plane. Due to this the lore on the Shadowfell in DnD is kind of self-contradicting and really depends on which edition you are playing. In this article I set out my version of the Shadowfell. It may not be 100% canonical although I have tried to at least be compatible with the stuff in the 5e DMG. I’ve skewed away from the evil necromancy angle and aimed it more as a sort of dim, dismal reflection of the Material Plane, mainly just so it contrasts nicely with the bright, passionate Feywild. Anyway, I hope you find something useful from this, or at least enjoy reading it as much as I enjoyed writing it.

# Contents

# 1. The Shadowfell
- Geography
- Shadowfell Portals
- Effects on Travellers
- Flora and Fauna
- Domains of Dread

# 2. Cities and landmarks
- The Spire
- Gloomwrought
- The Lost River

# 3. Notable inhabitants
- The Raven Queen and the Shadar-Kai
- The Vistani

# The Shadowfell

**Geography**

The Shadowfell is one of the two “echoes” of the Material Plane. It (like the Feywild) shares the same basic layout. Physical features like seas, oceans, forests, and mountains appear in the same locations in each world although there are clear differences that make it immediately obvious you are not in the Material Plane. The Shadowfell is a very pale, shadowy reflection. All the colour and vitality are leached out. In the Shadowfell everything exists in dull shades of grey. There is no sun or moon or even stars although a strange, dim grey light pervades everywhere allowing a degree of sight. Mist and thick fog hang permanently in the air and any light source is rapidly smothered, illuminating only half its normal distance.

The colour is not the only thing lacking. The Shadowfell also lacks the basic vitality of the other planes. Everything here decays and erodes faster. Great mountain ranges in the Material Plane quickly become nothing more than tall hills in the Shadowfell. Most land is flat and featureless and rivers tend to be smaller and more stagnant than their Material equivalents. Plants struggle to grow in the dark and the poor soil leaving forests full of thin, twisted, leafless trees. Animals too find little to eat and subsist, barely clinging to life.

**Shadowfell Portals**

Portals between the Material Plane and the Shadowfell can be temporary or permanent and can form naturally or be artificially created. The portals will only exist in places where no direct sunlight falls on them and can easily be dispelled by exposing them to the sun. Creating a Shadowfell portal (either naturally or artificially) occurs through a lot of death happening in a single location. While the Shadowfell is not a plane of the dead _per se_ spirits do have a connection to it and it is easier for spirits to travel to their resting place via the Shadowfell than the Material Plane. This means that if a sufficient number of people are killed at once then the combined weight of their spirits entering the Shadowfell can rip a tear in the walls that separate the two planes. These tears will rapidly absorb the ambient magic around them, closing if there is not enough magic to sustain the opening. Since the Shadowfell lacks magical energy, the portals are usually much smaller on the Shadowfell side and it is often the case that travel is only possible from the Material Plane and once in the Shadowfell a traveller must find another way out or find a way to increase the size of the portals (usually done by feeding it a huge amount of magic). The portals are pretty much invisible to the naked eye (although they can be easily found using magic). To pass through one a traveller often simply walks into a shadow on the Material Plane and emerges in the Shadowfell. This makes it very easy for people and animals to be unwittingly trapped in the Shadowfell and most creatures in the Shadowfell are descended from something which entered accidently and never escaped. As a final note about the portals they tend to be points around which denizens of the Shadowfell gather. The portals leak some of the energy of the Prime Material plane into the Shadowfell making them more lively and magical than the rest of the plane. Conversely the Material side of a portals tend to be devoid of life as any energy is siphoned into maintaining the portal.

**Effects on Travellers**

The colourlessness and lack of energy of the Shadowfell seeps into the minds of any who visit. Apathy quickly sets in and actions feel pointless. Many succumb to this entirely, slowly wasting away, barely summoning the energy to seek out food or water. Those that fall completely to this despair become shadowy versions of themselves wandering the Shadowfell until eventually they lose even the willpower to maintain their physical form at which point they merge with the mist and fog of the Shadowfell. Some travellers are able to resist the temptation to fall into despair and can still function although they will still find it difficult to make plans beyond their immediate needs. In general travelling as a group, entering the Shadowfell deliberately, having a strong and concrete purpose, and certain magical wards all aid in resisting the Shadowfell’s draining effects. Certain creatures, generally those born in the Shadowfell, are almost immune to the Shadowfell’s effects although even then a life in the Shadowfell leads to practically minds focused on survival first and foremost.

The DMG has some guidance on representing this mechanically through the dread table which obviously you can expand upon. For some groups you might prefer simply to run this through roleplay as party members slowly become tired and lose their ambition to do anything more than survive. Going too overboard on this can suck the fun out of the game and so bear that in mind, also remember that adventurers are generally exceptional people and so you can easily justify them resisting the Shadowfell for longer than an NPC would.

**Flora and Fauna**

The soil of the Shadowfell is poor and plants struggle to grow in it. In the most part the plants that do grow are similar to the plants of the Material Plane that thrive in harsh conditions. It rarely rains but the thick fog that covers the Shadowfell allows plants to gather enough moisture and the faint but permanent light seems to be enough for them to just about survive. Still, most plants will be thin, pale and will struggle with the conditions they find themselves in. Large areas of the Shadowfell lack plant cover entirely, consisting of bare rock with maybe the occasional lichen.

The sparse plant cover means animals also struggle to find enough food. Animals do exist here but they are rarer than in the Material Plane and hunting is roughly twice as hard as it would be in the Material Plane. Most animals in the Shadowfell are very similar to Material Plane creatures since mostly they are descended from creatures that accidently passed through a portal and got trapped in the Shadowfell. Some creatures unique to the Shadowfell do exist such as Shadow Hounds and Shadow Dragons. These creatures generally come from normal creatures mutated by powerful mages for a particular purpose then cast aside into the Shadowfell when no longer needed or from powerful, magical creatures like a dragon slowly mutating to cope with the relative lack of magic in the Shadowfell.

**Domains of Dread**

The Domains of Dread are a unique part of the Shadowfell. These areas function as prisons for exceptionally evil creatures. The size of the domains varies with some being a single building and others being the size of a small country. Unlike the rest of the Shadowfell the areas within a Domain of Dread are generally like the Material Plane and may well feature functional societies. Each domain is ruled over by a Darklord for whom the domain was created as a permanent prison and punishment. The domains are designed to inflict emotional harm to the Darklord, usually by forcing them to relive their great failures and mistakes for all eternity. Entering one of these domains is quite easy as it usually requires simply walking through an area of unusually thick mist in the Shadowfell. Leaving is much more difficult and may be impossible without first defeating the ruler of the domain. Domains of Dread are covered in more detail in the Ravenloft campaign setting, so I am not going into them here.

# Cities and Landmarks

As stated above the basic geography of the Shadowfell follows that of the material plane meaning that any major landmarks of the material plane will be seen in the Shadowfell although natural features will be smaller and less impressive. There are very few man made landmarks as buildings rapidly fall apart to little more than foundations in just a few years unless carefully maintained. Towns spring up around portals and will be there for a few years but once the portal closes the towns are abandoned and left to fall apart. This makes navigating the Shadowfell challenging as most maps are outdated very rapidly and even with a map there are few landmarks to go off. However there are a few permanent landmarks that can be seen in the Shadowfell. Three of these are outlined below.

**The Spire**

The Spire is an incredibly tall and narrow tower made of jet black stone. The tower drains magic from the land around it making it very dangerous for anyone who relies on magic. The area within a 1 mile radius circle around the tower functions as if it is within an antimagic field while for a further mile spells are harder to cast requiring the use of a spellslot 1 level higher than normal. The Spire’s full height is unknown as the top vanishes into the mist and gloom of the Shadowfell and no successful attempts to climb it or fly up without magic have yet been made. The true purpose of the Spire is unknown although it has found an unofficial use as a place for top secret meetings to guarantee there is no magical surveillance.

**Gloomwrought**

Gloomwrought is the largest city in the Shadowfell and one of the few permanently inhabited places. It is situated in a natural harbour and is one of the major trading hubs for planar travellers. In particular the city specialises in hard-to-get magical components, especially those of a necrotic nature. It is one of the few places that the ingredients for rituals such as ascension to lichdom along with various incredibly potent drugs and poisons. Outside of the shops and markets the city also has a range of inns and entertainments aimed at the many travellers and traders who visit. The city is technically ruled by the human nobleman Prince Rolan but he has very little power and generally the city is lawless with the closest thing to authority being the various merchants and their private guards. The city is inhabited by a range of creatures, humans, halflings, tieflings and dwarves making up the majority. There are also usually a large number of Shadar-Kai in the city and those seeking out the Raven Queen often start their journey by meeting with the Shadar-Kai in Gloomwrought.

**The Lost River**

The Shadowfell is often associated with death and it is true that many souls pass through the Shadowfell on their way to their final rest. At certain times the passage of these souls is visible as a great twisting, silvery stream known as the Lost River which dances through the air and is visible from every point in the Shadowfell. During the periods when the River is visible many creatures travel to the Shadowfell. Some come simply to observe the phenomenon, but most seek to draw power from the River. Shadar-kai pluck souls which may hold interesting memories from the stream and take them to their queen. Demons try and steal souls from the stream while devils offer desperate spirits one last chance for resurrection. For the brave and skilful adventurer it is possible to tap into the stream of souls in the Lost River and draw from the knowledge of the souls contained within although the information gained is often cryptic and the process risks one’s own soul getting sucked into the River.

# Notable Factions

While the Shadowfell does not have a huge amount in the way of civilisation there are a few notable groups that adventuring groups should be aware of when travelling the Shadowfell.

**The Raven Queen and the Shadar-Kai**

The Raven Queen was once a powerful elven queen who sought to end the chaos within the elven pantheon and reopen the route for elves to reach the heavens of Arvandor. To this end she gathered her followers, known as the Shadar-Kai, and drew upon their power to ascend to godhood. During the ritual several elven wizards tried to steal some of her power for themselves. Ultimately the ritual was corrupted and the queen was destroyed while her followers were cast into the Shadowfell. Despite the destruction of her physical form the queen was too powerful to be killed and instead her essence merged with the Shadowfell and formed a new being known as the Raven Queen. The Raven Queen longs to return to the joys of her life in the Material Plane but she cannot leave the Shadowfell or even take a physical form and so she instead lives through the memories and experiences of others. She spends her time seeking new memories and emotions, hoarding them like a raven hoards shiny trinkets. Whether there is some long-term goal to this is unknown. She may be gathering knowledge as part of some plan to return to physical life, or her destruction may have shattered her mind turning her into a broken obsessed creature. Either way her ceaseless effort has allowed her to gather one of the largest collections of knowledge in the multiverse.

Most of the Raven Queen’s followers survived the ritual although they were cast into the Shadowfell. Permanently bound to the Queen they do their best to aid her and carry out her whims, travelling throughout the multiverse on her instructions. Time in the Shadowfell has changed the Shadar-Kai and they are no longer beautiful, proud elves. Instead they now appear old and gaunt with hollow faces and cold hearts. They are usually indifferent and cold to those they meet and prefer to observe from a distance where possible. These traits are less prominent when the Shadar-Kai leave the Shadowfell. Their bodies are restored to the youth and beauty of elves although their skin remains incredibly pale. The restoration of their body to some extent warms their hearts as well and Shadar-Kai on the Material Plane are often willing to talk and exchange news with other travellers. One unique feature of the Shadar-Kai is their deaths. Their souls are permanently bound to the Raven Queen and so upon death they return to her Fortress of Memories where she crafts them a fresh body with which to carry on their never-ending servitude.

The Raven Queen has no physical form with which to walk the world so gathers knowledge in more indirect ways. Her main method is by observation. She can see through the eyes of any raven and through this she learns of current events through the multiverse. Where her ravens identify a particularly interesting event the Raven Queen dispatches her Shadar-Kai to the area to gather more information, collect physical trinkets and souvenirs, and in extreme cases capture the spirits of the dead to add to the Raven Queen’s collection. As well as seeking out knowledge herself the Raven Queen also trades with other creatures. Many mortals offer up their memories to the Raven Queen in exchange for strange dreams and omens of the future. Some mortals go further entering into pacts with the Queen and serving as warlocks for her allowing her to expand her power in the Material Plane.

The Raven Queen resides in her Fortress of Memories deep in the Shadowfell. The Fortress is filled with her collections of trinkets and treasures each linked to some strong memory or emotion. As well as the mundane items there are also millions of stored memories which the Queen has stolen or traded for over millennia. The true prize of her collection are the souls of the dead which she has intercepted on their way to their true afterlife. These souls reside in the Fortress as their memories and experiences are slowly absorbed into the Raven Queen’s essence. For those who visit the Fortress it is a strange experience. The Fortress tests visitors by constructing fantasy worlds built around the visitors own experiences. These fantasies play out like dreams allowing the Raven Queen to observe and learn about the visitor. If deemed worthy she may allow the visitor to ask her for a boon, usually knowledge from her vast collection. Many visitors bring the Queen a gift to try and tip the odds in their favour though how successful this strategy is unknown. While the Fortress itself is an impressive building it is surrounded by a large citadel manned by the Shadar-Kai who will mercilessly destroy any who seek to overthrow their Queen. For those who come to seek an audience in good faith the Shadar-Kai are more welcoming and will offer hospitality and will attempt to prepare visitors for the trials they will face within the Fortress.

The Shadar-Kai army assembled at the Fortress of Memories may seem excessive but it is worth noting that the Raven Queen has many enemies. Her library of memories is possibly the greatest store of knowledge in the multiverse and one that many would like to have access to. In particular the lich Vecna sends his followers to plunder the Fortress and many battles have been fought between them and the Shadar-Kai. The second enemy of the Raven Queen is the Demon Prince of Undeath Orcus who is jealous of the Raven Queen’s ability to absorb the essence of souls passing through her realm. This enmity makes the Shadar-Kai very wary of the undead and they will generally destroy any undead creature on sight.

**The Vistani**

_As a quick note the Vistani in 5e are fairly heavily based on negative stereotypes about Romani people. It’s worth being mindful of this if you use the Vistani in your games and maybe discuss it with your group beforehand._

While the most powerful group in the Shadowfell is undoubtedly the Shadar-Kai adventurers may find the Vistani to make more useful allies. The Vistani are travellers and are one of the few groups that can navigate the Shadowfell, even being able to enter and leave the Domains of Dread freely. They are also entirely immune to the melancholy that affect all other inhabitants of the Shadowfell.

Vistani travel in small, close-knit groups which rarely stay in one place for more than a few days. Vistani camps can be identified by the bright colours and horse-drawn wagons along with being the only places in the Shadowfell where music and laughter can be heard. Within Vistani camps craftspeople can be found making small items of metalwork, clothing, jewellery and pottery while others sell things collected during their travels. These items can range from the entirely mundane to the potently magical and it is occasionally possible to see powerful mages visiting Vistani camps on the off chance there is something there worth buying.

Vistani families are complex and tangled with many matches occurring between different Vistani groups as well as with outsiders. This leads to a wide ancestry with most Vistani having a connection to a magical bloodline somewhere in their family tree. This means most Vistani groups have some members with magical abilities, often skewing towards subtle magic of reading futures and manipulating destinies rather than the flashier magic of wizards and sorcerers.

The Vistani and the settled people of the Shadowfell are mutually distrustful and so the Vistani have a tend to avoid the cities of the Shadowfell. This distrust carries over to other outsiders including adventurers but if adventurers aid the Vistani they will often be willing to reciprocate and may allow adventurers to travel with them, pretty much guaranteeing safe passage across the Shadowfell.